Chili pepper seeds are edible, so you can leave them in while cooking, though there may be reasons why you want to remove them. Learn why.

I receive this question occasionally on the Chili Pepper Madness blog in various forms – Should I remove my pepper seeds before eating the peppers? Are chili pepper seeds OK to eat? Do YOU remove your seeds before cooking or do you leave them in?

Because of so many questions, I thought it would be a good time to open a general discussion about chili pepper seeds. Here are some points of interest to consider.

CHILI PEPPER SEEDS ARE EDIBLE.
Yes, you can eat chili pepper seeds. Chili pepper seeds will not harm you and will pass right on through your body.

ARE CHILI PEPPER SEEDS TOXIC OR POISONOUS?
No, they are not. People eat them every day without issue.

ARE CHILI PEPPER SEEDS SPICY?
Chili pepper seeds are actually NOT spicy, as they do not contain capsaicin, the chemical that makes peppers hot. Capsaicin is actually located within the whitish pithy pepper innards, the placenta, which you can remove to make the pepper milder in most cases. Pepper seeds might be coated with some of the oils from this pith, so if you do detect heat, it will be from the pith, not the seeds themselves.

REASONS YOU MAY WANT TO REMOVE SEEDS BEFORE EATING OR COOKING WITH CHILI PEPPERS
All this said, there are a few reason why you may want to remove the chili pepper seeds before cooking with them.

First, some pepper seeds can have a bitter taste, which may affect recipes with subtle flavors. Oftentimes, hotter peppers don’t lend themselves to recipes requiring subtle flavors, as many of them are in your face with heat, but as you cook more and more with peppers and appreciate how nuanced they can be, removing them may benefit the overall flavor.

Also, when removing the inner pith of the peppers, which normally reduces the overall heat, you’ll wind up removing the seeds anyway. You’ll hear some people say, “To reduce the heat of your final dish, remove the pepper seeds”. This is not accurate, as mentioned above. The heat resides within that whitish pith, which holds the seeds, so when removing that for heat purposes, you’ll lose the seeds anyway.

The biggest reason you may want to remove your pepper seeds before cooking with or eating them is TEXTURE. When you are making a pepper sauce, hot sauce, or anything that blends into a thin or creamy texture, you’ll notice the seeds will float throughout your liquid. The seeds themselves easily escape processing, and may throw your smooth texture off balance. It is the same with tomato skins, which are often removed before making a silky tomato sauce.

If your goal is to make a smooth sauce, then you can either remove the seeds before cooking, or better yet, strain the final cooked product after processing to remove the remaining solids, which will contain the seeds.

DO I REMOVE MY PEPPER SEEDS BEFORE COOKING?
Sometimes. In most cases, I just leave them in. I have no desire to tame the heat with my recipes and the seeds do not bother me at all. I barely notice them in most recipes. But as mentioned, if I’m looking for a smoother sauce, I’ll strain afterward.

There are many Louisiana hot sauces on the market. You probably have your favorite brand. There are numerous artisanal blends from smaller hot sauce makers, along with the big names like Texas Pete’s, Valentina, Melinda’s, Frank’s, and the biggest name of all when it comes to Louisiana Hot Sauce – Tabasco.

If you’ve dabbed the original Tabasco onto your food, you’ve tasted Louisiana hot sauce. It’s a gorgeous thing really, simplicity in its finest form, deliciousness delivered with only 3 ingredients – Chili Peppers, Vinegar, and Salt.

With those 3 ingredients, however, there are numerous variations, as you’ve most likely tasted.

What types of chili peppers will you use?
What type of vinegar?
How much salt?
What is your ratio of these 3 ingredients?
How about a blend of peppers?
Using more than one vinegar?
What if we introduce other ingredients?
This is where your creativity comes into play, as well as your taste buds. Original Louisiana hot sauce used cayenne peppers, though Tabasco uses tabasco peppers, from which it coined its moniker.

You are free to use any pepper you’d like, though red peppers are ideal to retain the enticing red color. Consider red jalapeno peppers or red serrano peppers, which I can tell you from personal experience make EXCELLENT Louisiana hot sauce.

Let’s talk about the biggest factors that will affect the outcome of your Louisiana hot sauce.

VINEGAR FOR LOUISIANA HOT SAUCE – WHICH SHOULD I USE?
This is the question with ANY hot sauce, as there are many choices, and each will compliment your chili pepper choice in different ways. Most common is Distilled White Vinegar, which is inexpensive and strong in flavor.

Use this if you are seeking to mimic the flavors of the larger commercial brands. White Wine Vinegar is a bit more mellow, and Rice Vinegar even more so, with a touch more sweetness.

Red Wine Vinegar is made from fermented red wine, which will introduce a slightly fruity flavor to your sauce.

Apple Cider Vinegar is quite fruity, and preferred for when you’re seeking a fruity sweetness. Malt Vinegar has a strong, distinctive flavor from its barley ale beginnings, and well worth experimentation.

There are others to consider, such as balsamic vinegar, coconut vinegar and more. Experiment to your personal tastes.

WHAT CHILI PEPPERS SHOULD I USE FOR HOMEMADE LOUISIANA HOT SAUCE?
As mentioned, traditional peppers include cayenne, tabasco, and red jalapeno peppers, though this style recipe can be made with ANY chili pepper. I have made Louisiana Hot Sauce from superhots and was quite happy with the results. Talk about heat!

Just consider that your end flavor and color will be affected by your chili pepper choices.

TO FERMENT OR NOT TO FERMENT FOR MAKING LOUISIANA HOT SAUCE
This is a big factor. Original Louisiana Hot Sauce is made with fermented peppers. Tabasco is famous for this. They ferment their peppers in oak barrels for up to 3 years before mixing the resulting mash with vinegar and salt. I have made Louisiana Hot Sauce with both fermented and fresh chili peppers and can tell you there is a noticeable difference in the final flavor.

Louisiana Hot Sauce made from fermented peppers is mellower and has more fully developed flavor.

That said, Louisiana Hot Sauce made from fresh peppers has a bit more bite to it, and doesn’t take nearly as long to make. I encourage you to make it both ways and see which way you prefer.

Because of this, I am include both ways for you to make simple Louisiana Hot Sauce, with fermented peppers and fresh peppers.

HOW LONG WILL THIS SAUCE KEEP?
It should keep a few months easily in the fridge, or even longer. It’s all about the acidity. To be technical, target level ph for shelf stable foods is below 4.6 ph, but should probably be lower for home cooks, around 4.0 or so, to account for errors. If you’re concerned, add more vinegar to lower the ph. Sauces made with fermented chili peppers will last even longer.

WHERE’D YOU GET THAT SAUCE BOTTLE?
I find them locally sometimes, but I also order through Amazon. Here is a link to some bottles I like (affiliate link, my friends!): Swing Top Glass Bottles, 8.5 Ounce – Set of 4. If you like the smaller bottles that most hot sauce makers use, here’s another link: Hot Sauce Bottles, 5 Oz – 24 Pack.

CAN I PROCESS THIS HOT SAUCE FOR LONGER STORAGE?
Absolutely. Just be sure to use proper canning/jarring safety procedures.

WHAT SHOULD I DO WITH HOT SAUCE?
Aside from drizzling it over anything you please, here’s a post I did about How to Cook with Hot Sauce. As if you need even MORE reasons to eat hot sauce. I hope you find it helpful!

CHILI PEPPER SEEDS ARE EDIBLE.
Yes, you can eat chili pepper seeds. Chili pepper seeds will not harm you and will pass right on through your body.

ARE CHILI PEPPER SEEDS TOXIC OR POISONOUS?
No, they are not. People eat them every day without issue.

ARE CHILI PEPPER SEEDS SPICY?
Chili pepper seeds are actually NOT spicy, as they do not contain capsaicin, the chemical that makes peppers hot. Capsaicin is actually located within the whitish pithy pepper innards, the placenta, which you can remove to make the pepper milder in most cases. Pepper seeds might be coated with some of the oils from this pith, so if you do detect heat, it will be from the pith, not the seeds themselves.

REASONS YOU MAY WANT TO REMOVE SEEDS BEFORE EATING OR COOKING WITH CHILI PEPPERS
All this said, there are a few reason why you may want to remove the chili pepper seeds before cooking with them.

First, some pepper seeds can have a bitter taste, which may affect recipes with subtle flavors. Oftentimes, hotter peppers don’t lend themselves to recipes requiring subtle flavors, as many of them are in your face with heat, but as you cook more and more with peppers and appreciate how nuanced they can be, removing them may benefit the overall flavor.

Also, when removing the inner pith of the peppers, which normally reduces the overall heat, you’ll wind up removing the seeds anyway. You’ll hear some people say, “To reduce the heat of your final dish, remove the pepper seeds”. This is not accurate, as mentioned above. The heat resides within that whitish pith, which holds the seeds, so when removing that for heat purposes, you’ll lose the seeds anyway.

The biggest reason you may want to remove your pepper seeds before cooking with or eating them is TEXTURE. When you are making a pepper sauce, hot sauce, or anything that blends into a thin or creamy texture, you’ll notice the seeds will float throughout your liquid. The seeds themselves easily escape processing, and may throw your smooth texture off balance. It is the same with tomato skins, which are often removed before making a silky tomato sauce.

If your goal is to make a smooth sauce, then you can either remove the seeds before cooking, or better yet, strain the final cooked product after processing to remove the remaining solids, which will contain the seeds.

DO I REMOVE MY PEPPER SEEDS BEFORE COOKING?
Sometimes. In most cases, I just leave them in. I have no desire to tame the heat with my recipes and the seeds do not bother me at all. I barely notice them in most recipes. But as mentioned, if I’m looking for a smoother sauce, I’ll strain afterward.

HOW TO SMOKE CHILI PEPPERS
First, wash and dry your chili peppers. Make sure they are free from dirt, and use only the freshest of peppers. If they show any signs of rot, toss them out.

Next, slice the peppers in half and core them out, if desired. You don’t need to, though. I keep them intact as most of the heat is within the pepper innards.

Again, if you see any rot, toss them out. Also, if the peppers are thicker walled, you can slice them into quarters or rings, therefore increasing the surface area for the smoke to penetrate.

Next, prepare your smoker and heat it to 200 degrees F. Set the peppers on a tray or over aluminum foil so they don’t fall through your grates and set them into the smoker. You’ll need to follow your own smoker instructions for maintaining your overall temperatures.

You can also use your grill with a smoker box, as long as you are able to maintain a constant temperature.

Next, get your smoke going. There are many different wood options available to you. I prefer maple wood, though mesquite is a good choice, as is hickory.

Here you should really experiment with wood of your choice, as each will impart a different smoky flavor. Use enough wood to smoke the peppers for 2-3 hours.

3 is best, as it takes a while for the wood smoke to truly permeate the peppers, but check on them at the 2 hour mark to make sure everything is OK. At this point, the peppers will be smoked but not completely dried. Thinner peppers will be dryer than others.

If smoking thinner walled peppers like habanero peppers, smoke them for less time if you plan on using them in a non-dried form.

You can use them in different recipes at this point if you’d like. Freeze them for future meals or preserve them in oil, or just hold them in the fridge where they will last a couple days.

You can smoke longer if you’d like, as the peppers will not be completely dried after 3 hours. It will take many more hours to completely dry the peppers in the smoker, but I prefer a different method to finish the process.

Finally, dry your smoked peppers in a dehydrator. A dehydrator is the most efficient way to completely dry chili peppers. Transfer the smoked peppers to your dehydrator trays and dehydrate them at 125 degrees F for about 8-10 hours, or until they are completely dried through.

At this point, you can store the pods in sealable containers and use them as needed.

WHAT TO DO WITH SMOKED DRIED CHILI PEPPERS?
Smoked and dried chili pods can be rehydrated in hot water and used in any number of dishes. See How to Rehydrate Chili Peppers.

Alternatively, crush them and sprinkle over foods, or grind them into powders for making new blends and seasonings, or just sprinkle them as they are for a nice touch of smoked chilies. Be sure to use gloves if handling hotter peppers, as they may irritate your skin. This is particularly true of superhot peppers.

Check out our information for How to Dehydrate Chili Peppers and Grind them Into Chili Powders.

2 pounds of chopped pepper pods yields about 3-4 cups of dried peppers, and when ground, yields about 1 cup of powder.

I made some smoked chili powder with my yield. Use in as you would any recipe that calls for chili powder. It adds a nice smoky element to the dish.

HOW TO MAKE HOMEMADE CHIPOTLES AND CHIPOTLE POWDER
Chipotles are nothing more than dried smoked jalapeno peppers. They are typically made from red jalapenos, so follow the instructions above with your selection of jalapeno peppers.

Use a milder wood to impart a lighter smoke flavor. Once smoked and dried, you are free to store them and rehydrate them as needed, or grind them up, per above, into a perfect homemade chipotle powder.

WHERE TO BUY HATCH CHILE PEPPERS?
Amazon: I have ordered Hatch chile peppers online through Amazon and was happy with the pods. If you are partial to Amazon, buy Hatch Chile Peppers here. (Affiliate link, my friends!)

The Hatch Chile Store: This is a very popular company that grows a lot of peppers each year. They sell both fresh and frozen roasted Hatch Chile peppers, along with other Hatch chile pepper products. I have personally used their products and am happy to recommend them.

New Mexican Connection: This is also a popular company that grows a lot of peppers each year. The owner is a super nice guy. They sell both fresh and frozen roasted Hatch Chile peppers, along with other Hatch chile pepper products. I have personally used their products and am happy to recommend them.

WHY SHOULD I FREEZE MY STUFFED PEPPERS?
Freezing your stuffed peppers is a smart way to keep them. I enjoy making larger portions so we can have quick meals throughout the week.

It’s a huge time saver. You can make a very large batch of your favorite stuffed peppers on a weekend and enjoy them all month long.

Bonus!

HOW LONG DO STUFFED PEPPERS LAST IN THE FREEZER?
Stuffed peppers will easily last several months in the freezer, even up to a year, though mine don’t stick around that long.

However, there are some important steps to take to ensure you retain the quality you desire.

HOW TO FREEZE STUFFED PEPPERS / FREEZING STUFFED PEPPERS
Cook your stuffed peppers according to your recipe. No half-cooking, please. Make sure the meats are cooked through completely, or they will require additional cooking once they are thawed. Cool the cooked stuffed peppers before freezing.
Place all of the stuffed peppers into a freezer-safe dish. A large casserole dish works well. Cover them in aluminum foil and then wrap theentire dish in plastic wrap to completely seal them up. Leave no part of the peppers exposed or else you might get freezer burn.
You can also freeze each pepper individually by cooling them, then wrapping them in plastic wrap. Set them into airtight freezer bags and freeze. A vacuum sealer also works great.
Your stuffed peppers will last easily 3 months or longer. I personally don’t like to freeze them longer than 3 months.

When you’re ready to chow down on those stuffed pepper creations, remove the wrapping and bake them straight from frozen at 350 degrees until they are thawed and warmed through,, about 20-30 minutes.

You can also thaw them in the refrigerator for several hours before cooking and they will heat through faster.

I prefer to cook the stuffed peppers completely before freezing, but you don’t have to. All of the stuffing ingredients should be cooked through, but if you’d prefer to freeze your stuffed peppers BEFORE cooking them, here are the steps.

FREEZING UNCOOKED STUFFED PEPPERS
Cook your stuffing ingredients through according to your recipe instructions and set them aside.
Blanch your peppers in boiling water a few minutes to lightly soften. Cool, then stuff your peppers.
Place all of the stuffed peppers into a freezer-safe dish. A large casserole dish works well. Cover them in aluminum foil and then wrap the entire dish in plastic wrap to completely seal them up. Leave no part of the peppers exposed or else you might get freezer burn.
You can also freeze each pepper individually by cooling them, then wrapping them in plastic wrap. Set them into airtight freezer bags and freeze. A vacuum sealer also works great.
When you are ready to enjoy your stuffed peppers, you can cook them from frozen at 350 degrees until they are cooked through, or thaw them overnight to save a bit of time. Your cooking time will be longer than cooking with the already cooked peppers, about 30-35 minutes or longer, to your preference.

Capsaicin is essentially the ingredient that makes chili peppers hot. When you bite into any kind of hot pepper and you get that kick on the tongue, love it or hate it, it’s the fault of capsaicin. It produces a burning sensation when it touches mucus membranes, which is the reason why so many people love to put it in their food. It’s also the reason why you should be very careful with your hands after you are done handing any sort of hot pepper – most people have made the mistake of rubbing their eyes after touching a hot pepper at least once, but usually you won’t do it again!

Of course, if the capsaicin level is too high, physical skin can be burnt away by it as well. So if you handle a large quantity of hot peppers for a long period of time, it’s likely a good idea for you to wear gloves as you do so. In the event that the capsaicin levels get unbearably high, the best remedy is cold milk. Obviously, this works best if you’ve overloaded yourself by eating too much of it. If capsaicin comes in contact with other areas of the body, try a mild sugar solution. Capsaicin is delicious, but be careful when you handle it!

WHY ARE SOME JALAPENO PEPPERS HOTTER THAN OTHERS?
While the jalapeno heat is contained in the whitish innards and veins (or placenta) of the pepper, jalapeno pepper heat levels do vary depending on many factors such as age of the pepper, thickness of the inner placenta of the pepper, when and where it was grown (including climate and soil conditions of that location and cultivation), not to mention weather and amounts of rainfall.

That said, a jalapeno pepper can vary in heat level from between 2,500 and 8,000 Scoville units. Learn more about Scoville Heat Units.

If you find that a pepper is too hot, you can always reduce the heat by removing the whitish innards, but it is difficult to make them hotter without adding a different source of heat, such as a hotter pepper like serrano or habanero. Also, the red jalapeno peppers tend to be sweeter and not quite as hot, so you can choose those. Jalapenos will turn red the longer they are on the vine and eventually fall off.

So, next time you select your jalapeno peppers from the grocery store, or most other peppers for that matter, you can expect some heat variety.

WHAT IS THE SCOVILLE SCALE?
Originally, Scoville ground up peppers and mixed them with sugar water, then tested them with a panel of tasters who sipped from these sugar-water-pepper solutions. He would then dilute the solutions bit by bit until they no longer burned the tongues of the tasters, after which he would assign a number to the pepper based on the number of dilutions needed to kill the heat.

The measurements are divided into multiples of 100. Note that 1 part per 1,000,000 dilutions of water is rated at 1.5 Scoville Units. Pure capsaicin, the stuff that makes chili peppers hot, is rated between 15 – 16,000,000 Scoville units. This is incredibly HOT! See the chart below to compare several peppers on the range of the scale, and how they relate to pure capsaicin.

As noted in the FAQ section, several factors can affect the heat of a pepper, but they generally fall into the ranges listed below.

Today, testing chili pepper heat is not quite so subjective. It has been replaced by High Performance Liquid Chromatography, or HPLC, which measures the pepper’s heat producing chemicals and rates them in ASTA pungency units.

The Scoville Scale can be used to not only measure chili peppers, but anything that is made from chili peppers, such as hot sauce. What is really being measured is the concentration of “capsaicin”, the active ingredient that produces that sensation of heat on our tongues.

The term “capsaicin” comes from the pepper plants’ classification, of the genus Capsicum. Capsaicin occurs naturally in peppers along with other capsaiciniods, all of which make up the unique tastes and heat reactions of each pepper, depending on their ratios.

A RECENT HISTORY OF HOT PEPPERS – HOTTEST PEPPERS IN THE WORLD – NEWS AND THE SCOVILLE SCALE
The Red Savina Habanero Pepper was the original “hottest pepper in the world“, with a heat range of up to 580,000 Scoville Heat Units, but newer, hotter chili peppers came fast and hard in the last 20 years.

Collectively called “superhot chili peppers”, these are peppers that top the 1 Million Scoville Heat Unit range, and I have some of them listed below. You can also review this link of Super Hot Chili Peppers List or my collection of Superhot Chili Peppers.

The list of the hottest chili peppers in the world is growing all the time. Growers are producing hotter and hotter hybrids with hopes of pushing the Scoville Heat Scale limits. 2017 saw a flurry of news articles with potential new “hottest pepper in the world” claims, including the “Dragon’s Breath Pepper” and the ultra blazing “Pepper X“. However, there have been no official confirmation of tests performed.

The “Dragon’s Breath Pepper” quite possibly may have been a publicity stunt, so there is little hope for that particular pepper, though “Pepper X” was propagated by Ed Curie, the man behind the current record holder, the “Carolina Reaper”. But for now, we can only await for more official announcements.

HOW DO YOU STOP THE BURNING AFTER EATING CHILI PEPPERS?
Eat Dairy

Because of the innate hotness of all chili peppers, they can burn not only the inside of your mouth, but your skin as well. If you find that you simply can’t bear the heat after eating a chile pepper, try to consume a dairy product, like milk, yogurt, or ice cream.

Dairy products contain a chemical called casein that combats the effects of chile peppers’ capsaicin (the chemical that makes peppers hot) by stripping it from its receptor site on the skin.

Sugar

I’ve also tried sugar and that seems to work in a pinch. Sugar can help absorb some of the hot chili oil and can reduce the burn.

BURNING SKIN (AKA HOT PEPPER HANDS) – HOW TO TREAT BURNING SKIN FROM CHILI PEPPERS
Try rubbing alcohol first to remove the burning oil. Then, soak the skin in milk or another dairy product. Only use water or saline for your eyes, however, and please remember that the best way to combat the chile pepper heat is to use rubber gloves when handling peppers.

Also, this was suggested by a poison control center for those times you do not have a dairy product on hand: Wash the skin with warm, soapy water. Rub the skin with vegetable or olive oil and let set a minute. Rinse.

PLEASE KEEP THE METHODS IN MIND THESE METHODS FOR STOPPING THE CHILI PEPPER BURN ON YOUR SKIN
Rubbing Alcohol

The oil that makes chili peppers hot, capsaicin, is more soluble in alcohol, so a quick rub down with rubbing alcohol (or even a high proof booze) can help wipe it from your skin.

Use Dairy

As mentioned above, dairy products contain the chemical “casein” that combats the effects the capsaicin (the chemical that makes peppers hot) by stripping it from its receptor site on the skin.

Consider using milk, yogurt, sour cream or crema, or even ice cream to soak the burning skin.

Oils

Oils can be effective in helping to dissolve the burning chili oils. Dab some olive oil or any other vegetable oil onto your burning skin with cotton balls or a napkin. Soak or wipe the skin.

Dish Soap and Water

Dish soaps are meant to help clean oily plates, so they may be effective in washing away the chili oil from your burning skin.

Weak Bleach Solution

This is according to Alton Brown of “Good Eats”. He says to douse your already burning hands in a mild solution of 5 to 1 water to bleach. The bleach helps wash away the capsaicin that hasn’t yet absorbed into your skin.

Baking Soda or Corn Starch Paste

Starches can help draw out the oil from your burning skin so you can wash it away and possibly neutralize it.

Yes, what IS a chili pepper exactly? The chili pepper is the fruit of the plants from the genus Capsicum, which are members of the nightshade family, Solanaceae. Chili peppers are considered fruit, not vegetables. Chili peppers are members of the nightshade (Solanaceae) family and are related to tomatoes, cherries and eggplant.

Chili peppers originated in South America, but are now grown around the world because they are used as spices or as medicine. Christopher Columbus reportedly sampled a chili pepper and thought it was a relative of the black pepper, dubbing it a “pepper”, which is inaccurate, though the name persists today.

In South America, they were known as Aji.

Here is a useful link on Wikipedia
Chili Pepper Institute
HOW THE CHILI PEPPER GOT ITS NAME
Our great American history finds Christopher Columbus on a long and arduous quest for spices. Food has long been a traditional and powerful reason to traverse the expanses of our world and different cultures. One of the great foods Columbus returned with was “aji”, or “child” as it is translated.

On his return to Europe, the “aji” was renamed the “Calcutta Pepper” by Leonard Fuchs, a German botanist who believe that Columbus had found India. And thus it began.

Also, interestingly enough, the original word for chile peppers in the Mexican Indian language, Nahuatl, is “chilli.”

AMERICA’S FAVORITE CHILI PEPPER
America’s Favorite Chile pepper is by far the jalapeño, a thick-fleshed pepper about 3 inches long (give or take). It’s a bright green little guy that can be lovingly incorporated into just about anything, from soups to Lemonade.

The majority of our jalapeño peppers come from Mexico, where the natives eat them as snack foods, plucking them in droves from sidewalk carts and fields. The red variety of the jalapeño is a bit milder than the green variety, and sweeter as well. They are also milder than their cousin, the serrano, another popular chile pepper, though not as widely known as our favorite, the jalapeño.

WHAT MAKES CHILI PEPPERS HOT?
Most of us love the jalapeño (and other beautiful peppers) because of the little “kick” we get when we take a bite of one. Sure, as far as taste is concerned, jalapeños are delicious, but that blast of spiciness that bursts in your mouth and ravishes your tongue is a powerfully added bonus, making hot peppers among the greatest flavors in the world.

That spiciness we all love and crave comes from a compound called capsaicin that is found in all hot peppers. Interestingly enough, capsaicin is found in no other plant than the chile pepper. A single drop of this substance combined with 100,000 parts water is still noticeably spicy. Isn’t that great!

Capsaicin itself is tasteless and odorless and is produced by the glands in the chile pepper’s placenta, found at the top portion of the pepper below the stem.

Note: The placenta is about sixteen times hotter than the rest of the pepper and is usually removed along with the seeds (another hot part of the pepper) when preparing food. If you’re looking for a good kick with your dishes, leave it in (along with the seeds), and see what you get. Oh yeah!

Scientists have observed that many rodents and other small mammals do not particularly like the jalapeño, possibly an evolutionary advantage developed through the generations to protect the peppers from evildoers. Birds, however, seem to be unaffected by the pepper heat. This, of course, is an advantage to our friend, the chile, because when birds eat the peppers, they disperse the seeds through their droppings all across the land, thus perpetuating that thing we all love so much (though admittedly in a rather gross manner).

TRYING TO BEAT THE HEAT
Have you ever put a hot, spicy pepper into your mouth on a wild whim and then suddenly realize that “Argh! This is too hot!” Of course this shouldn’t happen with the jalapeño, but it can happen with some of the other, hotter varieties of chiles, like the habanero.

WHAT TO DO WITH THE CHILI PEPPER BURN?
One bit of advice: Don’t Drink The Water! Pure capsaicin is soluble in alcohol but not soluble in cold water. Hence, instead of dousing the raging flame on your tongue, the water will only spread the spices around in your mouth and make the situation worse. Instead, try sugar or milk to curb that luscious heat (if you can’t take it, that is).

After time, you can build up a tolerance to the heat by continuing to eat hot peppers in small doses, but you’ll always have the initial burst of spicy flavor with our friend, the jalapeño.

Additionally, when handling chile peppers, you should always wear rubber gloves to avoid contact with the pepper oils. The oils can cause a burning sensation on the skin. In a pinch you can use the yellow rubber gloves that many people use while washing dishes, but thin latex gloves work wonderfully for maneuverability. It’s really a lot easier to cut and handle the peppers with these types of gloves.

Learn More about How to Stop the Chili Pepper Burn

SAFETY REMINDER:
WEAR GLOVES WHEN CUTTING UP HOT PEPPERS!
HOW DO YOU MEASURE CHILI PEPPER HEAT?
Since capsaicin is the heat producing substance found in peppers, it is only natural to measure pepper heat by measuring the amount of capsaicin within the pepper. But how?

In 1912, a pharmacologist named Wilbur Scoville invented a standard for measuring the capsaicin in peppers, and subsequently the power of that pepper heat.

He called the test, interestingly enough, the “Scoville Organoleptic Test.” Now there’s a name for you. How did it work?

Scoville ground chile peppers into a mixture of sugar water and alcohol. He then had five tasters sip the mixture and grade it for hotness. Since then, we’ve come up with more sophisticated methods for grading the hotness of peppers into units called “Scoville Units” in honor of the man who took on such a proud and wonderful task.

Today, peppers range from 0 Scoville Units for the regular bell pepper to upwards of 200,000 to 300,000 Scoville Units for the extremely hot habanero. Talk about hot! And what a range! Jalapeños are about 5,000 Scoville Units, smack dab in the perfect spot for hotness and taste.

Learn more about the Scoville Scale.

TAKING ADVANTAGE OF THAT CHILE PEPPER HEAT
Peppers can be used as a weapon. Imagine this: you’re about to be mugged when suddenly you take the attacker by surprise and hurl a dozen or so hot peppers at him, poking him in the eye and causing him to slip and fall…

Seriously, many pepper sprays use the chemical, capsaicin, to ward off attackers and promote safety. Pepper sprays are marketed to women and police, and even to hunters who can use the power of the pepper to ward off grizzly bears in the woods. It’s even been said that pepper spray is even more effective than tear gas!

CHILI PEPPER NUTRITIONAL INFORMATION
Serving size 1 jalapeno pepper (14 g – average size)

Calories 4
Total Fat 0g
Sodium 0mg
Total Carbohydrate 1g
Dietary Fiber 0g
Protein 0g
% of U.S. RDA
Vitamin A 2%
Calcium 0%
Vitamin C 10%
Iron 1%
CHILI PEPPER ROOTS
The original chile plant, classified as a fruit, not a vegetable, hails from either Peru or Bolivia, depending on which anthropologist you ask, circa 7000 B.C. The tiny, pungent red fruit was most widely cultivated in Mexico, where it was deemed important enough to serve as currency as well as food. Seeds were carried by birds throughout Central, South, and southern North America. Modern Mexico still produces the greatest variety of chile peppers, about 140 types at last count.

CHILI PEPPERS AND NOBEL PRIZES – AN INTERESTING COMBINATION
Did you know that the Nobel Prize was awarded to Hungarian scientist Albert Szent-Gyorgyi in 1937 for his work with chile peppers? It’s true!

Gyorgyi discovery that chiles are a rich source of vitamin C, are high in vitamins A and E, potassium, and folic acid. He also noted (as a side bar) that chile peppers are incomparable for clearing sinuses and cleansing pores.

Got a cold? Break out the peppers!

You’ll find capsaicin in its chemical form of guafenesin in commercial expectorants like Sudafed and Robitussin.

HOW TO ROAST DRIED CHILI PEPPERS
Dried peppers should be wiped clean with a damp cloth or paper towel before roasting. Place in a dry skillet over medium-low heat and keep turning until fragrant, 2-4 minutes. Be careful not to blacken or the chiles will turn bitter. More on roasting chili peppers.

HOW TO ROAST FRESH CHILI PEPPERS
Fresh peppers can be roasted directly on a gas burner or under the broiler. Cook until charred all over and then transfer to a plastic bag to sweat. Seal the bag and let steam 10 minutes or longer. Remove blackened skins with fingertips or carefully scrape with a paring knife. Do not place under running water to peel or you will lose flavor as the oils wash off. More on roasting chili peppers.

That’s a great question! The name of peppers can vary from region to region, hence the different spellings. Depending on where you go, it is either “chili pepper”, “chilli pepper”, or “chile pepper”. Take your pick!

“Chilli” is more commonly used in England and Europe. “Chile” is by far the most commonly used in America’s Southwest regions and particularly in New Mexico. “Chile” is actually the Spanish spelling and pronunciation of the word. However, “chili” is far more common in general usage and spelling, an Americanized spelling of the original “Chile” spelling that came out of Mexico.

Die-hard chile pepper lovers argue that “Chile” is the only proper spelling, and that “Chili” refers only to the delicious food with meat, beans and chili spices that you eat out of a bowl, but most people use “Chili” or use both “Chili/Chile” interchangeably. Unless you’re from the U.K., then it’s probably “Chilli”, though they recognize all variations as well.

HOW TO FREEZE SALSA
You can freeze your salsas by pouring them into a freezer safe container. Freeze them up to 6 months and thaw for later use. You’ll likely loose any crunchy texture of chunkier salsas, but the thawed salsas work great for incorporating into sauces, soups, or slow cooker recipes.

THE JALAPENO PEPPER
Behold the jalapeno. Who does not like the jalapeno? The jalapeno is one of the first peppers people try, not counting the green pepper which has no spice, so I’m not counting that pepper. Jalapeno peppers are everywhere, from store bought salsas to foods from your local fast food joint, to the Mexican restaurants on your every street corner. The jalapeno is just so cool. He’s your buddy, the life of the party, the suave and debonair little guy that struts through the door and makes everyone feel all warm and fuzzy, that guy you want to slap on the back and suck down a beer with.

In terms of spicy food, the jalapeno is your first kiss. He’s your introduction to an expansive and exciting new world of outstanding taste and meals that dance on your tongue. He’s your gateway to so many wonderful things. The jalapeno is someone you’d introduce to your mother. He’s the perfect little kick to make fun what was once a bit boring.

But to every Ego, there is an Id.

THE HABANERO PEPPER
The habanero pepper is all things bad boy, all things seduction, and all things graduation (if you can tame it). If you go on living the spicy food life long enough, like any addiction, you start to look for more, for something stronger, for something to satisfy that mountainous desire for heat that builds until it scrapes the sky. Jalapenos are outstanding and perfect for every occasion, but every once in a while, you want to let the party animal loose. Every now and then you want something to reach out and throttle you and remind you that you’re alive. You want to go a little crazy. You want to hop onto the back of the habanero’s motorcycle and make a little road music, and you’ll be sure not to bring him home to meet your mother.

This. Is. One. Bad. Dude.

But he’s sweet and he loves you. And you’ll love him for everything he does for you. And when you cross that edge to where your tongue can handle the ultimate heat of the habanero, you know you’ve graduated.

Of course the flavors are quite different and the consistency of the peppers aren’t the same, but I think it’s fun to boil it down to the heat. How far do you want to push yourself today? Do you feel like Rico Suave? Or do you feel more like Bone Saw McGraw? Let’s see what you’ve got.

CAPSICUM ANNUUM
Capsicum annuum is also known as the Chile de Arbol and the Mississippi sport pepper, depending on where it is consumed. The plant itself is native to both North and South Americas and tends to thrive in most regions that these environments present. Of the five cultivated capsicum plants, this one is the most widely cultivated and the most widely distributed.

While the word “annuum” in the title of this plant might suggest that this variety of pepper is an annual, it is not – assuming that the plant is planted in a place where there are no frosts, it can develop into a hardy shrub that exists perennially in the garden. The flowers that this plant produces tend to be off white or purple, and the resulting fruit is generally red, green, or yellow.

This species is popular all around the world. In North America, these varieties of peppers are most commonly called chili peppers or bell peppers – both come from this strand of pepper. This variety of pepper is also used medicinally in certain parts of Africa, and many people grow it for the purpose of its looks in their gardens.

CAPSICUM FRUTESCENS
Capsicum frutescens is a species of chili pepper that most likely originated in Central or South America. It grows very well in this area of the world and still grows there both as a wild plant and in cultivation. There are varieties of capsicum frutescens that are annual and varieties that are perennial in nature, and the flowers that these peppers produce are usually white or greenish white in color.

Generally speaking, the fruit they produce starts off yellow, and then darkens into red upon complete maturity. The place where the Capsicum frutescens variety of pepper is used most often is likely in Ethiopian cuisine – it has been cultivated there ever since the 19the century. Today the plant is still used heavily in many kinds of African cooking, though it is less popular in other parts of the world. It has also shown up occasionally in the cuisine of North Africa, featuring in both Moroccan and Egyptian cooking.

Capsicum frutescens is available in most supermarkets in developed countries, generally in the specialty aisle. It has a unique spice that is augmented by an underlying sweetness, and many who try this variety of pepper find themselves hooked.

CAPSICUM CHINENSE
Capsicum Chinense is often known as the yellow lantern chili when it is presented in English-speaking markets, mostly due to the unique pumpkin-like fruits that this variety of chili pepper produces. The most well known version of this pepper is the habanero, which is one of the hottest chilies regularly available for consumption in most supermarkets and is the most popular in dishes.

These peppers arenative to the Yucatan Peninsula area of Central America and on the Caribbean islands. These peppers can act as a perennial in the right environments, though in many areas where they are cultivated – particularly in the northern regions – they sometimes function as annuals. Even as an annual plant, however, the seedlings will germinate after the cold part of the year and the plant will live on.

Capsicum Chinense have high ornamental value as well as their use in cooking. They have unusual shaped flowers and a variety of different shapes for the fruit itself, so many gardeners use them to spruce up their flowerbeds as well as their dinners.

In restaurants, these peppers are popular for their potency. Most Western cuisine as a whole is not overly spicy, but elements of dishes that require kick often use Capsicum Chinense peppers, due to how potent they are. They are a very cost-effective ingredient in many Western kitchens for this reason – you need fewer of them to pack a punch in a dish!

CAPSICUM PUBESCENS
Capsicum Pubescens is a variety of pepper that is native to Central and South America. The name itself refers to the hairy leaves that this variety of pepper has – if you come across any pepper plant that has furry leaves, you’re likely dealing with a Capsicum Pubescens. This variety of pepper also roots and grows very quickly, leading it to be considered a “tree chili” in certain parts of the world.

This variety of pepper is the least cultivated out of all of the hot pepper strains. It is native to the northern regions of its area, so it is unique in its ability to withstand much cooler temperatures than its other chili brethren. The flowers of this variety of pepper are pretty distinct, as well – they are purple red, and tend to grow in clusters of four or five.

Unless you happen to live in or near an area where this particular variety of pepper is being cultivated, you’ll like to find them the hardest variety of chili to track down. They are considered very hot where chilies are concerned, and have one of the highest heat ratings that peppers can get. If you’re on the lookout for these and you live away from their main agricultural areas, consider looking online for the dried varieties. These are easier to find and are often just as hot and useful in cooking as their fresh counterparts.

CAPSICUM BACCATUM
The Capsicum Baccatum is unique in chili pepper varieties due to its history – this is one brand of pepper that was actually brought to Central and South America by the colonizers, rather than the colonizers taking the pepper plants back with them. They are famous for their strangely shaped fruits – some people compare them to tulip flowers. There are a variety of different peppers that are under this branch of the pepper family, but the most famous variety is probably the aji Amarillo, or the Amarillo chili.

The Amarillo chili is probably used most often in Peruvian cuisine. In fact, this kind of chili is so popular in this part of the world that it is often served as a condiment on the table alongside red onions and garlic.

If you are looking for Capsicum Baccatum, your best bet is likely with a South American supermarket. Since these peppers are such an integral part of Peruvian cuisine, any South American supermarket is likely to have Amarillo chilies dried, if not fresh and on the shelf.

This pepper has a unique smoky quality to it that other peppers have yet to be able to reproduce. If you’re looking for something a little bit more unusual that still delivers the familiar zing of other, more popular peppers, check out what the Capsicum Baccatum family has to offer.

The list of the hottest chili peppers in the world is growing all the time. Growers are producing hotter and hotter hybrids with hopes of pushing the Scoville Heat Scale limits.

2017 saw a flurry of news articles with potential new “hottest pepper in the world” claims, including the “Dragon’s Breath Pepper” and the ultra blazing “Pepper X“. However, there have been no official confirmation of tests performed.

The “Dragon’s Breath Pepper” quite possibly may have been a publicity stunt, so there is little hope for that particular pepper, though “Pepper X” was propagated by Ed Curie, the man behind the current record holder, the “Carolina Reaper”. But for now, we can only await for more official announcements.

I spoke with Ed at the Chi-Town Hot Sauce Expo in mid 2018 and he didn’t have any new news.

Please note that while this is a list of officially tested peppers, you will still find a large range of heat from pepper to pepper, so you might personally experience a 7 Pot Primo as hotter than a Carolina Reaper. Still, all of these peppers are quite hot!

Here is a list of the world’s hottest chili peppers to date, from hottest to mildest (if you can call that mild!). Updated January 2018.

With a Guinness-submitted 1,569,383 Scoville Heat Units average and recently measured peak levels of over 2,200,000 SHU, SMOKIN’ ED’S CAROLINA REAPER® has officially completed its long journey to the top of “super-hot” chili charts. This is an extremely hot variety developed by a grower named Ed Currie. It is also called HP22B pepper. As of 2013 it is over 7 generations old. Ed created this chili pepper plant variety by crossing a Pakistani Naga with a Red Habanero type from St Vincents Island in the West Indies.

In February 2012, the 2012 New Mexico Chile Conference, in association with Jim Duffy of Refining Fire Chiles, announced that the Trinidad Moruga Scorpion is the hottest chili pepper in the world. Clocking in at 2,009,231 Scoville Units, this chili pepper is beyond blistering.

Learn more about the Trinidad Moruga Scorpion chili pepper here.

Since capsaicin is the heat producing substance found in peppers, it is only natural to measure pepper heat by measuring the amount of capsaicin within the pepper. But how?

In 1912, a pharmacologist named Wilbur Scoville invented a standard for measuring the capsaicin in peppers, and subsequently the power of that pepper heat.

He called the test, interestingly enough, the “Scoville Organoleptic Test.” Now there’s a name for you. How did it work?

Scoville ground chile peppers into a mixture of sugar water and alcohol. He then had five tasters sip the mixture and grade it for hotness. Since then, we’ve come up with more sophisticated methods for grading the hotness of peppers into units called “Scoville Units” in honor of the man who took on such a proud and wonderful task.

Today, peppers range from 0 Scoville Units for the regular bell pepper to upwards of 200,000 to 300,000 Scoville Units for the extremely hot habanero. Talk about hot! And what a range! Jalapeños are about 5,000 Scoville Units, smack dab in the perfect spot for hotness and taste.

Learn more about the Scoville Scale.

Peppers can be used as a weapon. Imagine this: you’re about to be mugged when suddenly you take the attacker by surprise and hurl a dozen or so hot peppers at him, poking him in the eye and causing him to slip and fall…

Seriously, many pepper sprays use the chemical, capsaicin, to ward off attackers and promote safety. Pepper sprays are marketed to women and police, and even to hunters who can use the power of the pepper to ward off grizzly bears in the woods. It’s even been said that pepper spray is even more effective than tear gas!

Most of us love the jalapeño (and other beautiful peppers) because of the little “kick” we get when we take a bite of one. Sure, as far as taste is concerned, jalapeños are delicious, but that blast of spiciness that bursts in your mouth and ravishes your tongue is a powerfully added bonus, making hot peppers among the greatest flavors in the world.

That spiciness we all love and crave comes from a compound called capsaicin that is found in all hot peppers. Interestingly enough, capsaicin is found in no other plant than the chile pepper. A single drop of this substance combined with 100,000 parts water is stillnoticeably spicy. Isn’t that great!

Capsaicin itself is tasteless and odorless and is produced by the glands in the chile pepper’s placenta, found at the top portion of the pepper below the stem.

Note: The placenta is about sixteen times hotter than the rest of the pepper and is usually removed along with the seeds (another hot part of the pepper) when preparing food. If you’re looking for a good kick with your dishes, leave it in (along with the seeds), and see what you get. Oh yeah!

Scientists have observed that many rodents and other small mammals do not particularly like the jalapeño, possibly an evolutionary advantage developed through the generations to protect the peppers from evildoers. Birds, however, seem to be unaffected by the pepper heat. This, of course, is an advantage to our friend, the chile, because when birds eat the peppers, they disperse the seeds through their droppings all across the land, thus perpetuating that thing we all love so much (though admittedly in a rather gross manner).

Trying to Beat the Heat

Have you ever put a hot, spicy pepper into your mouth on a wild whim and then suddenly realize that “Argh! This is too hot!” Of course this shouldn’t happen with the jalapeño, but it can happen with some of the other, hotter varieties of chiles, like the habanero.

What to do?

One bit of advice: Don’t Drink The Water! Pure capsaicin is soluble in alcohol but not soluble in cold water. Hence, instead of dousing the raging flame on your tongue, the water will only spread the spices around in your mouth and make the situation worse. Instead, try sugar or milk to curb that luscious heat (if you can’t take it, that is).

After time, you can build up a tolerance to the heat by continuing to eat hot peppers in small doses, but you’ll always have the initial burst of spicy flavor with our friend, the jalapeño.

Additionally, when handling chile peppers, you should always wear rubber gloves to avoid contact with the pepper oils. The oils can cause a burning sensation on the skin. In a pinch you can use the yellow rubber gloves that many people use while washing dishes, but thin latex gloves work wonderfully for maneuverability. It’s really a lot easier to cut and handle the peppers with these types of gloves.